So let’s do a test
what happens if we move one of these ports into a different VLAN?
Now earlier when I was doing this test I had some problem in GNS3.
So what I’m gonna do is I’m gonna shut g0/2 down and g0/3.
So the only interfaces that are now up are 0/0 and 0/1
in this topology, just to start with a simple network to make a point.
So those interfaces are up, up the other interfaces are down.
What I'll also do actually is to shutdown any other interfaces
to make sure the things converge quicker.
So I'll shut down that range and this range of interfaces
sh ip int brief also shut down gigabit 3/0 - 3
So sh ip interface brief
All our interfaces are shutdown except for those 2 interfaces
so gigabit 0/0, gigabit 0/1
Is router 1 able to ping router 2?
Yes it is but if we put this interface gigabit 0/1 into VLAN 2
what will happen with the pings?
So switchport access vlan 2
now before I present here, notice the ping succeeds I'll repeat this 100 times.
And then hit enter on the switchport access VLAN command.
Notice the pings are starting to time out
so as soon as I moved the port from 1 VLAN to another
the devices are not able to communicate with each other.
sh spanning tree shows that
gigabit 0/1 is still in the learning phase of Spanning Tree
so we'll wait for a while for Spanning Tree to converge and then do the test again.
But what I’d like you to see is this, 2 devices were in the same subnet
and at the same VLAN and they were able to ping each other
as soon as we moved one port to different VLAN
they were no longer able to ping each other.
Spanning Tree is forwarding on the VLAN 2 on port gigabit 0/1
it’s also forwarding on gigabit 0/0 on VLAN 1.
So if we use the sh spanning tree summary command
we can see that VLAN 1 is forwarding
VLAN 2 is forwarding, there are no blocking ports
yet router 1 is not able to ping router 2
and router 2 is not able to ping router 1.
Because they are in separate VLANs.
Is router 2 aware that it’s in a separate VLAN?
The answer is no because no tagging information
or no VLAN information is gonna being sent on this port it’s an access port.
So we just a standard Ethernet frames.
There is no VLAN port information transmitted
on any of the frames going out on that port.
Now to prove this.
Let’s add some IP addresses into switch 1
so interface vlan 1 ip address 10.1.1.
Let’s make it 254 and then  interface vlan 2 ip address 10.1.2.254
for the mask, now need to no shut both of those
so go back to vlan 1 and no shut it.
So these are layer 3 Switch Virtual Interfaces on the switch.
we are basically creating a layer 3 IP address
on the switch for the relevant VLAN
so as an example, this switch can ping router 1 on VLAN 1
it lost the first ping because of ARP
but switch 1 can ping router 1
it can’t ping router 2 because router 2
needs to be configured  with the right IP address for VLAN 2
but before I do that notice when I do a capture on that port
traffic from the switch to the router is untagged
it's a standard Ethernet frame IP traffic
there is no tagging at all and as a last test
what I’ll do is configure router 2
so interface f0/0 ip address 10.1.2.2
so I’ve moved it from 1 subnet to another.
Ping 2.2 the switch can ping router 2 on this port.
Is the traffic tagged? So do the ping again.
Filter for ICMP traffic, notice there is no tagging information at all.
It’s just standard Ethernet.
So what is the summary of this test?
Their PCs in the topology are unaware of VLAN traffic
these are access ports or untagged ports.
In other words 802.1Q tagging is not used on these ports.
Can router 1 ping router 2?
so cannot ping 10.1.2.2
at the moment it won’t be able to
because the routers don’t have default routes configured.
So I’m gonna turn off IP routing
on this routers to turn them into PCs with dumb devices
and type IP default gateway
and in this case the default gateway router 2
will be this IP address on router 1
no IP routing that’s a command that turns an expensive router
into a dumb device IP default gateway 10.1.1.254
so router 1 has a default gateway configured.
Can it ping its default gateway?
Yes it can, can it ping router 2?
At the moment it can and the reason why is that
on these switches IP routing is configured by default.
However, if I type no IP routing which is true on a lot of switches.
The pings will not succeed because the switch is not doing Inter-VLAN routing.
To enable Inter-VLAN routing on a layer 3 switch such as this
or a physical switch you need the IP routing command
to route between the VLANs.
So to prove this on router 2
I’ll do a debug ip icmp so we can see if ICMP traffic is getting to the router.
Do the ping again and notice there are the echo replies
we can do something similar on router 1 and there are the echo replies.
debug ip packet will give us low information
I repeat this only once so we'll send 1 ping
which succeeded over there
and what you can see is the packet was routed out of the router
and sent to the destination as an IP packet.
So in other words, this end devices connected to a switch
are unaware that the switch is using VLANs.
The configuration of the switches as follows.
sh run int g0/0
that port is using default config which
which means that it’s an access port in VLAN 1
gigabit 0/2 is an access port in VLAN 2.
IP routing is enabled and we’ve configured layer 3 IP addresses
on the 2 VLANs to allow the switch to route between their 2 VLANs
configured which in turn allows router 1 and router 2
to communicate with each other.
Now if router 1 and router 3 are put into the same VLAN
and router 2 and router 4 are put into the same VLAN.
That kind of information needs to be communicated
from 1 switch to another using 802.1Q
So this port needs to be configured as a trunk port
so let’s prove that and then configure it.